Overhaul the `BASICS` part of the documentation (#50932)
LLNL/spack: lib/spack/docs/package_fundamentals.rst

.. Copyright Spack Project Developers. See COPYRIGHT file for details.

   SPDX-License-Identifier: (Apache-2.0 OR MIT)

.. _basic-usage:

====================
Package Fundamentals
====================

Spack provides a comprehensive ecosystem of software packages that you can install.
In this section you'll learn:

1. How to discover which packages are available,
2. How to get detailed information about specific packages,
3. How to install/uninstall packages, and
4. How to discover, and use, software that has been installed

.. _basic-list-and-info-packages:

--------------------------
Listing Available Packages
--------------------------

To install software with Spack, you need to know what software is available.

> You can search the available packages at the `packages.spack.io <https://packages.spack.io>`_ website, or using the ``spack list`` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can search for available packages on the `packages.spack.io <https://packages.spack.io>`_ website or by using the ``spack list`` command.
```

.. _cmd-spack-list:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``spack list``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``spack list`` command prints out a list of all of the packages Spack
can install:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack list

Packages are listed by name in alphabetical order.
A pattern can be used to narrow the list, and the following rules apply:

> * A pattern to match with no wildcards, ``*`` or ``?``, will be treated as it started and ended with ``*``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A pattern with no wildcards (``*`` or ``?``) will be treated as if it started and ended with ``*``
```

* All patterns will be treated as case-insensitive

To search for all packages whose names contain the word ``sql`` you can run the following command:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack list sql

A few options are also provided for more specific searches.
For instance, it is possible to search the description of packages for a match.

> A way to list all the package whose names or description contain the word ``quantum`` is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A way to list all the packages whose names or descriptions contain the word ``quantum`` is the following:
```

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack list -d quantum

.. _cmd-spack-info:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``spack info``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To get more information on a particular package from `spack list`, use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get more information about a particular package from `spack list`, use
```

`spack info`.  Just supply the name of a package:

.. command-output:: spack info mpich
   :language: console

Most of the information is self-explanatory.  The *safe versions* are
versions that Spack knows the checksum for, and it will use the
checksum to verify that these versions download without errors or

> malware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the information is self-explanatory.
The *safe versions* are versions for which Spack knows the checksum.
Spack uses this checksum to verify that the versions are downloaded without errors or malicious changes.
```

a number of messages from Spack, a lot of build output, and a message
that the package is installed.

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack install mpileaks
   ... dependency build output ...
   ==> Installing mpileaks-1.0-ph7pbnhl334wuhogmugriohcwempqry2
   ==> No binary for mpileaks-1.0-ph7pbnhl334wuhogmugriohcwempqry2 found: installing from source
   ==> mpileaks: Executing phase: 'autoreconf'
   ==> mpileaks: Executing phase: 'configure'
   ==> mpileaks: Executing phase: 'build'
   ==> mpileaks: Executing phase: 'install'
   [+] ~/spack/opt/linux-rhel7-broadwell/gcc-8.1.0/mpileaks-1.0-ph7pbnhl334wuhogmugriohcwempqry2

The last line, with the ``[+]``, indicates where the package is
installed.

Add the Spack debug option (one or more times) -- ``spack -d install
mpileaks`` -- to get additional (and even more verbose) output.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Building a specific version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Spack can also build *specific versions* of a package. To do this,
just add ``@`` after the package name, followed by a version:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack install mpich@3.0.4

Any number of versions of the same package can be installed at once

> without interfering with each other. This is good for multi-user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without interfering with each other. This is useful for multi-user
```

cross-compiles) of an installation. Spack is unique in that it can
also configure the *dependencies* a package is built with. For example,
two configurations of the same version of a package, one built with boost
1.39.0, and the other version built with version 1.43.0, can coexist.

This can all be done on the command line using the *spec* syntax.
Spack calls the descriptor used to refer to a particular package
configuration a **spec**. In the commands above, ``mpileaks`` and
``mpileaks@3.0.4`` are both valid *specs*. We'll talk more about how
you can use them to customize an installation in :ref:`sec-specs`.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Reusing installed dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, when you run ``spack install``, Spack tries hard to reuse existing installations
as dependencies, either from a local store or from remote buildcaches, if configured.
This minimizes unwanted rebuilds of common dependencies, in particular if
you update Spack frequently.

In case you want the latest versions and configurations to be installed instead,
you can add the ``--fresh`` option:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack install --fresh mpich

> Reusing installations in this mode is "accidental" and happening only if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reusing installations in this mode is "accidental" and happens only if
```

there's a match between existing installations and what Spack would have installed

> anyhow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
anyway.
```

You can use the ``spack spec -I mpich`` command to see what
will be reused and what will be built before you install.

You can configure Spack to use the ``--fresh`` behavior by default in
``concretizer.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   concretizer:
     reuse: false

.. _cmd-spack-uninstall:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``spack uninstall``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To uninstall a package, type ``spack uninstall <package>``. This will ask

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To uninstall a package, run ``spack uninstall <package>``. This will ask
```

``--dependents`` option.

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack uninstall --dependents mpich

will display a list of all the packages that depend on ``mpich`` and, upon
confirmation, will uninstall them in the correct order.

A command like

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack uninstall mpich

may be ambiguous if multiple ``mpich`` configurations are installed.
For example, if both ``mpich@3.0.2`` and ``mpich@3.1`` are installed,
``mpich`` could refer to either one. Because it cannot determine which
one to uninstall, Spack will ask you either to provide a version number
to remove the ambiguity or use the ``--all`` option to uninstall all
matching packages.

You may force uninstall a package with the ``--force`` option

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack uninstall --force mpich

but you risk breaking other installed packages. In general, it is safer to
remove dependent packages *before* removing their dependencies or to use the
``--dependents`` option.

.. _nondownloadable:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Garbage collection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When Spack builds software from sources, it often installs tools that are needed

> just to build or test other software. These are not necessary at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only to build or test other software. These are not necessary at runtime.
```

   cmake@3.16.1     hdf5@1.10.5      libsigsegv@2.12      libxml2@2.9.9  ncurses@6.1  perl@5.30.0     texinfo@6.5    zlib@1.2.11

   $ spack gc
   ==> The following packages will be uninstalled:

       -- linux-ubuntu18.04-broadwell / gcc@9.0.1 ----------------------
       vn47edz autoconf@2.69    6m3f2qn findutils@4.6.0  ubl6bgk libtool@2.4.6  pksawhz openssl@1.1.1d  urdw22a readline@8.0
       ki6nfw5 automake@1.16.1  fklde6b gdbm@1.18.1      b6pswuo m4@1.4.18      k3s2csy perl@5.30.0     lp5ya3t texinfo@6.5
       ylvgsov cmake@3.16.1     5omotir libsigsegv@2.12  leuzbbh ncurses@6.1    5vmfbrq pkgconf@1.6.3   5bmv4tg util-macros@1.19.1

   ==> Do you want to proceed? [y/N] y

   [ ... ]

   $ spack find
   ==> 9 installed packages
   -- linux-ubuntu18.04-broadwell / gcc@9.0.1 ----------------------
   hdf5@1.10.5  libiconv@1.16  libpciaccess@0.13.5  libszip@2.1.1  libxml2@2.9.9  mpich@3.3.2  openjpeg@2.3.1  xz@5.2.4  zlib@1.2.11

In the example above, Spack went through all the packages in the package database
and removed everything that is not either:

> 1. A package installed upon explicit request of the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A package installed by explicit request of the user
```

> 2. A ``link`` or ``run`` dependency, even transitive, of one of the packages at point 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, ``spack gc`` scans the package database.
It keeps only the packages that were explicitly installed by a user, along with their required ``link`` and ``run`` dependencies (including transitive dependencies).
All other packages, such as build-only dependencies or orphaned packages, are identified as "garbage" and removed.
```

structured the way you want:

.. code-block:: console

    $ spack find --json sqlite@3.28.0 | jq -C '.[] | { name, version, hash }'
    {
      "name": "sqlite",
      "version": "3.28.0",
      "hash": "3ws7bsihwbn44ghf6ep4s6h4y2o6eznv"
    }
    {
      "name": "readline",
      "version": "7.0",
      "hash": "722dzmgymxyxd6ovjvh4742kcetkqtfs"
    }
    {
      "name": "ncurses",
      "version": "6.1",
      "hash": "zvaa4lhlhilypw5quj3akyd3apbq5gap"
    }

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``spack diff``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It's often the case that you have two versions of a spec that you need to
disambiguate. Let's say that we've installed two variants of zlib, one with
and one without the optimize variant:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack install zlib
   $ spack install zlib -optimize

When we do ``spack find``, we see the two versions.

.. code-block:: console

    $ spack find zlib
    ==> 2 installed packages
    -- linux-ubuntu20.04-skylake / gcc@9.3.0 ------------------------
    zlib@1.2.11  zlib@1.2.11

Let's now say that we want to uninstall zlib. We run the command and hit a problem

> quickly because we have two!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say we want to uninstall ``zlib``.
We run the command and quickly encounter a problem because two versions are installed.
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ spack diff --json python@2.7.8 python@3.8.11

This data will be much longer because along with the differences for ``A`` vs. ``B`` and
``B`` vs. ``A``, the JSON output also shows the intersection.

------------------------
Using Installed Packages
------------------------

As you've seen, Spack packages are installed into long paths with hashes, and you need a way to get them into your path.
Spack has three different ways to solve this problem, which fit different use cases:

1. Spack provides :ref:`environments <environments>`, and views, with which you can "activate" a number of related packages all at once.
   This is likely the best method for most use cases.
2. Spack can generate :ref:`environment modules <modules>`, which are commonly used on supercomputing clusters.
   Module files can be generated for every installation automatically, and you can customize how this is done.
3. For one-off use, Spack provides the :ref:`spack load <cmd-spack-load>` command

.. _cmd-spack-load:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``spack load / unload``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have :ref:`shell support <packaging-shell-support>` enabled you can use the

> ``spack load`` command to quickly get a package on your ``PATH``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``spack load`` command to quickly add a package to your ``PATH``.
```
